This is an interview with Dr. Judith Baer by John
Zaloom on May 1, 1991, at Bolton Hall, and it's
concerning the student movement of the 60s.
First, I want to ask how you would describe the
situation of the students at Bryn Mawr when you
were there as compared to how it may have been
before that time and might have been after it. I
think I have a very good perspective. I arrived
there in 63. I took a year off. So I didn't graduate
until 1968, and it seems to me to have changed
extraordinarily in those times. And
essentially, in 1963, you still had, now remember
this was an elite women's college, You had very
hardworking, very docile, very unquestioning
students. And most of them were perfectly happy
with the assumption that they would spend four
years working like hell and be involved in the
intellectual riches of an education there. And
then they would get married and become suburban
housewives. That was the mindset. Bryn Mawr has
always graduated intellectuals. It has
graduated professors. It graduated Katherine
Hepburn, who certainly was not your typical 1930s
housewife. It's always had room for brilliant
eccentrics of that sort. But that was not the norm.
You'd go to class, and the professor would
lecture, and people would sit there. And I became
famous in my philosophy class for raising
questions. I don't think the professor minded
because he was new, but I think the students really
did because some people wouldn't even knit in
class. The year before I went there,
Mademoiselle, which at that time was running a
series about colleges, had an article in Bryn
Mawr, and they were talking about knitting in
class, and they interviewed one English teacher
who said, I always think I've succeeded in class if
I've made it difficult for them to get through that
complicated Swedish bit at the shoulder. That was
about how it was. And then by the time 68 rolled
around and I was graduating, I had changed my
professional goals from law school to political
science. I had this wonderful political science
professor who was my the director of my honors
thesis, and we had wonderful classes and always
very disputatious, and he refused to teach the
class in the usual lecture mode. We had student
radicals all over the place. We had people who had
been arrested in civil rights demonstrations who
were active in SDS. The editor of the student
newspaper the year I graduated was a radical and
her roommate, who was a junior, was elected
president of the Self-Government Association
for the next year, which was amazing. Because for
years, self-government's role had been to
rubber-stamp the administration. I didn't know
this until very recently, but there's a letter, an
anonymous letter in the current issue of my alumni
bulletin from a member of my original class, class
of 67, who was kicked out, was expelled by the
decision of the self-government honor board
because she got married, and the reason she got
married was that she was pregnant. Now, I mean,
this is just amazing. now that anything like that
could happen. But that's essentially what
happened to her. And that certainly was not
happening anymore. And the administration was
very conservative, although they were... It was
an interesting thing because Bryn Mawr was a
college established by the Society of Friends,
the Quakers, like Swarthmore and Haverford, who
were its neighbors. And I never understood how the
college had totally absorbed Quaker attitudes in
terms of social behavior, which are very
conservative. Quakers typically do not drink.
They do not forbid it, but they tend to question it.
We could not have liquor on campus. Quakers did
not, at that time, approve of extramarital sex.
were very limited in the number of hours that men
could be in our rooms or that we could stay out
overnight. We had sign-outs and we had hours that
we had to be in, parietal hours and all of those
things. I mean, there was no rule against sex
because that was too difficult a subject to
mention. It was the kind of thing that was
considered bringing discredit on the college. So
those ideas were absorbed from the Quakers. The
Quaker tradition of activism was not. Activities
like getting arrested for civil rights
demonstrations or protesting against the war
were not an honored part of the Bryn Mawr
tradition, although they very much were an
honored part of the Quaker tradition. And you had
this administration that I think was composed of
people that a hundred years before that would have
been called blue stockings, women
intellectuals. And they were very much in favor of
deviating from the norm in terms of having a career
and being a scholar. and you didn't have to get
married and have kids. But they were not in favor of
deviating from the norm in terms of social
protest. That was a very frightening thing for
them. And there was this kind of war between the
administration and many of the students, and
certainly the student leaders, which was going on
during the year at the end of the time, 67 and 68,
that I was there. OK. My next question you seem to
have covered a little bit. I was going to ask if the
phenomena in loco parentis was prevalent at Bryn
Mawr. Oh, was it ever. And what the rules and
regulations might have been. You seem to have
covered a couple of them. Now, the rules and
regulations were much more lenient than they were
at most places. And, you know, we used to joke, you
know, and in loco parentis means it means crazy
like parents. But, for example, you could stay out
until 1030 at night. without signing up. You could
have an unlimited number of sign outs, and it was,
let's see, it was 1230 on weekdays, 2 a.m. on
weekends, and if you were going someplace, oh, for
example, if you went to a play in Philadelphia, you
could get a 130 sign out on weekends because you
wouldn't be back. until that late. And you could,
unless you got on probation, you could have as many
of these as you wanted and you simply had to sign
out, say, where you were going. For overnights,
You could essentially go anywhere you wanted
except to a guy's dorm. You could go to somebody's
apartment. You could sign up as care of last name,
1500 Broad Street, Philadelphia. They didn't
care that it was your boyfriend. They wouldn't
check up on you. That was perfectly all right. But
you did have to sign up. They did have to know where
you were, which I think now we would see a violation
of privacy. As for parietal hours, as I recall,
When I first got there, men could be in your rooms
until 630, and then they could be in the public
parts of the dormitories, the smokers, and so on.
That was another thing. It was assumed that all
adults smoked at that time, until 1030. And by the
time I graduated, I think men could be in your rooms
until 1030. So they had changed. And these,
compared to what happened for most, not only for
women's colleges, but for women, in coed colleges
during the 60s, those were very, very liberal
regulations. But they did exist, and they became a
controversy, and eventually all sign outs were
abolished. Now, as I recall, that didn't happen
until I had left, but it was a really, it was a very,
very passionately fought and controversial
issue during the time I was there. Did you perceive
that many other changes occurred during just the
years that you were there in the rules and
regulations? Yes. There were the changes and the
relaxation on the way to abolition of the sign-out
rules and parietal rules. And by the way, now they
have co-ed dorms. The rules, the dress rules. For
example, you had to wear skirts at classes. You had
to wear skirts at dinner. All of that were changed.
And I think the year after I graduated, they were
totally abolished. Other than that, Most of the
big changes came after I'd left. But there was
certainly, I mean, it was clear by the time I
graduated that the sign-outs were going to go. The
parietal rules were going to go. They had already
been considerably relaxed. As far as the student
movement, first, if you might define it in your
terms, what do you think the movement means? And
secondly, tell me about when you became involved
in it. Well, I think of the student movement as
actually involving student power, issues of
student governance. And I think that you'd have to
say that it probably began, had begun, by 1968. And
I certainly got involved in it Oh, well, earlier
than that, I was involved in the time I got back from
my year away, which was January of 1967, insofar as
the movement was concentrated on changing pariah
rules, dress rules, sign-out rules, all of those
things, getting student governments over one's
own life. Later on, the focus broadened very much.
I mean, when I got to Chicago, As a graduate
student, of course, I had all the freedom I wanted.
Even the Graduate Women's Dormitory didn't have
those rules. Then, all of a sudden, the issue was
participating in faculty decision-making,
which concerned you. And I was involved from the
very beginning. My second quarter there, January
of 1969, it was announced that a very popular
radical feminist assistant professor in
sociology, Marlene Dixon, would not be rehired.
And the result of that was a student sit-in, was all
kinds of things. Mrs. Dixon wasn't rehired. She
got a year's reappointment, which she would not
ordinarily have gotten. She went on to McGill
University. And in fact, I really think I have to
say that that part of the student movement failed.
Students did not. win the power to participate in
important decisions. Now, they do sit on
committees in most universities, including A&M,
but they do not have any voice in tenure decisions
and hiring decisions. I think they should. I think
they're an important constituency. My views on
that have not changed. But students do not have
that participation. It would seem that the only
victory that has been gained is student
evaluations. Well, big deal, yeah. You have an
input. in terms of that. And by the way, most large
universities like A&M, which are
research-oriented, that's going to be a negative
input rather than a positive input. People can get
fired for bad teaching. They will not get kept on
because of good teaching alone. Now, in the
liberal arts colleges which emphasize teaching,
that may not be true. But it is certainly true in the
major universities. I have to say that the success
of the student movement has been mixed as far as
victory over sign-out hours, parietal hours,
which didn't affect men anyway in most places, or
didn't govern them. You have that as far as
participation in academic governance.
Governance, you don't have that to any meaningful
extent.
Was there a strong anti-war feeling at Bryn Mawr?
Oh, boy. It was there ever. And Bryn Mawr went
through the same metamorphosis that society did.
By the beginning of, in the time that, 64, 65, the
first years I was there, the anti-war sentiment
was very much a minority on campus. You had a very
large apathetic middle, and you had some people
who supported the war essentially because they
supported whatever The government did. I mean,
this was what you had been brought up to do. And by
the end of the 60s, the majority of the students
were against the war. Absolutely. Now, they were
against this particular war, the war in Vietnam.
They were not pacifists, most of them. They were
not necessarily advocates of a ban on nuclear
testing. I don't think that issue came up. But
certainly, the anti-Vietnam sentiment changed,
as it did in the country. probably a little ahead of
the other country. Were you first involved in the
movement in general and then specifically more
into the women's movement? I got involved through
civil rights to anti-war to student to feminist
and that was essentially my trajectory. There was
no feminist, obvious, real, powerful, feminist
presence at Bryn Mawr when I graduated. There
would be in another couple of years, but not in
1968. And, in fact, you really can say that the
women's movement, you almost have to say, you can
almost put a year to its beginning in that 68, 69.
Now, obviously, there were four, there were for
earlier impetuses like Betty Friedan's book, The
Feminine Mystique, in 63. But it was amazing. When
I left Bryn Mawr in 68, there was no feminist
movement. All of a sudden, in Chicago, in 69, there
was. And it was like that. It was incredible how
fast this particular mobilization happened. Do
you feel that that was because you went to Chicago
or because it was the time period? I think it was the
time period. Chicago was by no means unique, and by
the time within two years that I had left Bryn Mawr
in the fall of 1970, Kate Millett, who was the
author of Feminist Politics, had been hired to
teach a course there for one semester. That was how
quickly this happened. How involved were you with
the movement at Chicago as opposed to Bryn Mawr,
and what types of demonstrations did you attend
there? OK, do you mean the feminist movement or the
student movement? Any aspect of it. OK. I think at
the beginning I was just as much involved with
student and peace movements generally, more with
feminist movements, because of course there
hadn't been any. By the end of the time I was at
Chicago, which was 1974, less involved, partly
because writing a dissertation is really
something that you have to focus on, partly
because there was less going on. Let's see, I've
demonstrations, now I wasn't in the sit-in, but I
attended a lot of the demonstrations which
focused on the Marlene Dixon case in 1969. I
attended the Chicago demonstrations which
centered around Nixon's invasion of Cambodia or,
as we now know, Nixon's announcement of what
essentially was, you know, he'd been bombing
Cambodia for quite a while in spring of 1970 and the
murder of students at Kent State and Jackson
State. There was also Let's see, I didn't go to any
demonstrations in Washington after I moved to
Chicago. So let's see, there was supportive
demonstrations. There always are. If there's a
big demonstration in Washington or New York,
there are going to be supportive demonstrations
in places like Chicago. There was the moratorium,
the two moratoriums, October and November of 69,
the big demonstration in May of 1971, echoing the
demonstration in Washington Let's see. Oh, there
was in April 5, 1969, there was a big march, I think
nationwide demonstrations. I attended the one in
Chicago. In the summer of 1970, August 26, which is
the anniversary of the ratification of the 19th
Amendment, there was a huge feminist
demonstration all over the country. I attended
the one in Chicago. And let's see. I think after
1971 there wasn't much. That was really the kind of
ending of demonstrations. I see. Since you
finished your formal education in 1974, have you
still been actively involved with the
demonstrations or meetings dealing with women's
equality in general or in which you specifically
address the issue? Oh, yeah. I've made a memory now
off and on. In fact, I'm officially a member of the
Brazos County chapter, we just don't have much of a
chapter. Now, actually, I've been an active NOW
member. I've been a NOW member since 1976,
National Organization for Women. I've been to
pro-choice demonstrations. I remember
particularly one in Los Angeles in March 1986
because it was pouring rain. And then there was one
in November of 89 at the Capitol in Austin. I was at
that. So I continue to be involved, and I think as
for many people, my involvement has taken a
different kind of stance. There just aren't that
many demonstrations anymore. But now I get
involved, I think, more in my scholarship, which
is feminist-oriented, than I do in local
activism. With some people, there is more local
activism. From your resume, it is apparent that a
lot of your scholarship works deal with questions
of equality under the law, especially for women.
Do you feel that your interest in these types of
issues stems from being a student in the late 1960s
and early 70s? It goes back before that. I think
that my student activism stems from my own
consciousness of two things. I mean, now, we all
have a family joke that I've been a feminist ever
since I could read. And you've got to remember that
we're talking the 50s, you know, June Cleaver, the
feminine mystique. And this occurred to me as a
life I did not want to live. And later on, no, I can
remember the summer I was 10 making a decision that
I did not want to grow up to live the life my mother
did and the other women in our neighborhood. And it
was quite a conscious decision. I didn't realize
then that I needn't have worried. But there it was.
And that was roughly the same time as the Civil
Rights Movement was getting re-energized after
the Brown decision. And I was very sympathetic to
this. And both my own feminist consciousness,
although we didn't really have that word then,
except as an epithet, and my awareness of civil
rights were what basically impelled me into the
student movement. And that force also got me
involved in the feminist movement and feminist
writings. I think the way that I'm different from
many 60s radicals, I don't know how many, but at
least from the media prototype of the 60s radical,
is that for me that has not changed. I haven't gone
and voted for Reagan and joined the capitalist
majority and all that. Many of them have. What do
you feel are the legacies of the student movement
in which you participated, and where does the
issue of equality for women stand today?
Certainly one legacy of the student movement is
increased student control over their own lives.
You don't realize how parental it was 25 or 30 years
ago. Another legacy is
the ability
and the assumption of the right to question
governmental decisions. I think we tend to forget
that the vote in Congress on January 12th to get
involved in the Gulf was a very mixed vote, and this
is something that just did not happen in the early
and middle years of the Vietnam War. I think we have
forgotten this has all been buried in the euphoria
after the victory, but we do see the assumption of a
right on the part of individuals, on the part of
other politicians, to question governmental
decisions, particularly about war. I think
you've got to see a legacy. The feminist legacy is
very strong. You consider almost half of the
medical students and law students in this country
today are women. In graduate schools, the numbers
are lower in most disciplines, but they're still a
lot higher than they were 20 or 25 years ago. Very
important gains have been won. There have been
changes in laws. One important example is just the
extraordinary changes in rape laws. The focus,
with a few very bizarre cases, to the contrary,
which get a lot of publicity, there is more focus on
perpetrators and less focus on victims. There are
changes in the way that graduate fellowships and
things like that are awarded. There are changes in
hiring. I mean, it used to be 30 years ago, a law firm
or the State Department or an academic department
could say, we don't hire women. If a woman took the
oral examination in the State Department to
become a foreign service officer 30 years ago. Her
score, an automatic either 5 points or 10 points
was deducted from her score just for being a woman.
You don't see that anymore. I see a great deal that
still needs to be done. There is the phenomenon of
the glass ceiling. I mean, you see it if you compare
the percentage of women associate professors at
A&M to women full professors. You see it in
business and law firms. Women don't seem to get
promoted to the higher ranks. One thing that has
not changed is women's hugely disproportionate
share of family responsibilities for children,
for housework, for parents as they age, and so on.
We've all heard discussions about the mommy
track, which is a very controversial proposal.
But the whole idea, that couldn't even have
happened except for the fact that There is this
load of responsibility that women have that men
don't. To achieve real equality, that's got to
change. And I don't see that happening anytime
soon. Do you feel like the future holds much
positive for women's equality? Yes, I think there
are positive prospects. Certainly you've got to
say that there are gains. There are going to be
women who eventually are going to move into top
positions because of the fact that, well, just
simply that not all women have families. And those
that have children are having fewer children.
Those that marry are marrying later and are more
apt to get divorced. There are going to be women
with lots of years left who are professional, with
lots of time to devote to advancement. That's
going to be positive. However, Economic
recessions are very bad. We have one now. We're
always going to have some. Women are going to tend
to, in what were formerly male positions, are
going to tend to be the last hired and the first
fired. That's not only true in professional
positions, in higher paying blue collar
positions. One very positive sign is the Supreme
Court's decision in Johnson Controls that you
can't keep women out of positions because they're
involved with chemicals likely to harm a fetus.
And this was used against all women of
childbearing age. And one company defined
childbearing age as beginning at 5 and ending at
63, if you can believe. That's a very positive
decision, particularly for working class women.
there is a possibility of eventually getting
enacted the kind of bills that Bush has been
vetoing, the family leave, the civil rights
bills, the child care, all of those. Those will
help women very much. I was reading today that
you've In the New York Times article, you find
people like Phyllis Schlafly, the old anti-ERA
person, and Pat Schroeder in Congress on the same
side in some of these issues, which is rather
unusual. And if that is done, I see a lot in
positive. If it is positive, however, what we have
now and what we are likely to have in 92, the best
possible solution is a stalemate of Republican
president and Democratic Congress. It is
possible that you're going to have one or both
houses of Congress Republican. I don't think it's
going to happen. It could. If that is true, the
chances of change are even less. The big problem is
you can do all you want with the government. There
is not going to be equality until the behavior of
individual men and women in families change. And
that's something that's going to take
generations. So if you give me 1,000 years to
predict into the future, I'm optimistic. In the
short run, I'm less so. Well, I really appreciate
this interview. I enjoyed it. Thank you.